---
title: "The toad containment zone: keeping cane toads out of the Pilbara."
excerpt: "Halting the toad invasion"
short_name: "Toad Containment Zone"
date: 2024-11-15
start_date: 2024
end_date: 2027
led_from: "Curtin University and Rangelands NRM"
funders:
  - "WA Department of Water and Environmental Regulation"
  - "BHP"
industry_partners:
  - "Rangelands NRM"
  - "Nyangumarta Warrarn Aboriginal Corporation"
  - "Karajarri Traditional Lands Association"
collaborators:
  - "Ben Phillips"
  - "Tim Dempster"
  - "Brenton von Takach"
  - "Judy Dunlop"
header:
  teaser: "assets/images/Toad.png"
gallery:
  - image_path: "assets/images/projects/TCZ-map-australia.png"
    image_caption: 
---

A once in a lifetime opportunity has emerged for us to stop the spread of cane toads.  More than a decade of scientific work indicates that, by managing artificial waterpoints in the coastal strip between Broome and Port Hedland, we can halt the toad invasion.  Establishing this Toad Containment Zone (TCZ) will keep toads out of the Pilbara and potential habitat as far south as Shark Bay.  This action benefits the environment, but also communities in the Pilbara and further south; across 27 million hectares of Western Australia. 

Cane toads have spread to occupy more than 1.6 million square kilometres of Australia.  They have a massive impact on native predator species, who are fatally poisoned when toads arrive in an area.  Toads have recently colonised the Kimberley and they continue to spread.  They will arrive in the project area in 2027, so there is urgency to this project .


{% include gallery caption="There is a once in a lifetime opportunity to stop the toad invasion just south of Broome, by controlling access to artificial waterpoints." %}

## Progress

This project builds off more than a decade of research and community engagement.  The impending arrival of toads mean that now is the time to build the toad containment zone.  This is a large, complex project.  While much of the research and advocacy work is complete, it is time to execute the last pieces of implementation research, and to ramp up our community engagement.  

Funding from WA State government has enabled our first step up of community engagement through [TCZ workshop 1](/news/TCZWorkshop1), and [TCZ workshop 2](/news/TCZWorkshop2/).  We have also recently received funding from [BHP social investments](/news/BHP) to undertake important pieces of applied science work.  This will enable us to inform and test the design of toad-proof infrastructure.  We are also, through Deakin University, looking to recruit a [PhD student](/opportunities/PhD-TCZ/) to work on further aspects of the science of the TCZ.

We have built a coalition of on-ground land managers to deliver the work, we are now building a business model and looking for the full funding to implement the TCZ.  Watch this space!  For more information on the TCZ see [here](https://www.toadfree.zone).